# Of mans fall and diſobedience.

*ADams* fall, was his willing reuolting to diſobedience by eating the forbidden fruite. In *Adams* fall, wee may note the manner, greatneſſe, and fruit of it.

I. The manner of *Adams* fall, was on this ſort: Firſt, the diuell, hauing immediately before fallen himſelfe, inſinuateth vnto our firſt parents, that both the puniſhment for eating the forbidden fruit was vncertaine, and that God was not true in his word vnto them. Secondly, by this legerdemaine, hee blinded the eyes of their vnderſtanding. Thirdly, beeing thus blinded, they beginne to diſtruſt GOD, and to doubt of Gods fauour. Fourthly, they thus doubting, are mooued to behold the forbidden fruite. Fiftly, they no ſooner ſee the beauty thereof, but they deſire it. Sixtly, that they may ſatisfie their deſire, they eate of the fruite, which by the hands of the woman, was taken from the tree: by which act they become vtterly diſloyall to God. Gen. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Thus without conſtraint, they willingly fall from their integrity; God vpon iuſt cauſes leauing them to themſelues, and freely ſuffering them to fall. For we muſt not think, that mans fall was either by chaunce, or God not knowing of it; or barely winking at it, or by his bare permiſsion, or againſt his wil: but rather miraculouſly, not without the will of God, and yet without all approbation of it.

II. The greatnes of this transgreſsion muſt be eſteemed, not by the external obiect, or the baſenes of an apple, but by the offence it containeth againſt Gods maieſty. This offence appeareth by many treſpaſſes committed in that action. The 1. is doubting of Gods word: 2. want of faith; for they beleeue not Gods threatning, (*In that day ye eate therof, you ſhall die the death:*) But being bewitched with the diuels promiſe, (*ye ſhall be like Gods*) they ceaſe to feare Gods puniſhment, and are inflamed with a deſire of greater dignity. 3. Their curioſitie, in forſaking Gods word, and ſeeking other wiſedome. 4. Their pride, in ſeeking to magnifie themſelues, and to become like God. 5. Contempt of God, in tranſgreſsing his commaundements againſt their owne conſcience. 6. In that they preferre the diuell before God. 7. Ingratitude, that in as much as in them lyeth, they expell Gods ſpirit dwelling in them, and deſpiſe that euerlaſting bleſſed vnion. 8. They murther both themſelues and their progenie.

III. The fruite or effects. Out of this corrupt eſtate of our firſt parents, aroſe the eſtate of infidelity or vnbeliefe, whereby God hath included all men vnder ſinne, that hee might manifeſt his mercy in the ſaluation of ſome, and his iuſtice in the condemnation of others. Rom. 11. 32. *God hath ſhut vp all men in vnbeliefe, that he might haue mercy on all.* Gal. 3. 22. *The Scripture hath concluded all vnder ſin, that the promiſe by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt ſhould bee giuen to them that beleeue.*

In this eſtate, wee muſt conſider ſinne, and the puniſhment of ſinne. Sinne is three-fold.

The firſt, is the participation of *Adams* both *tranſgreſſion* and *guiltines,* whereby in his ſinne, all his poſterity ſinned, *Rom.* 5. 12. *As by one man ſin entred into the world, & by ſin death: ſo death entred vpon all men, in that all men haue ſinned.* The reaſon of this is ready. *Adam* was not then a priuate man, but repreſented all mankinde, and therefore looke what good he receiued from God, or euill elſewhere, both were common to others with him. 1. *Cor.* 15. 22. *As in Adam all men dye, ſo in Chriſt all men riſe againe.*

Againe, when *Adam* offended, his poſteritie was in his loynes, from whom they ſhould by the courſe of nature iſſue: & therefore take part of the guiltineſſe with him. Heb. 7. 9, 10. *And to ſay as the thing is, Leui, &c. payed tythes to Melchiſedec: for he was yet in the loynes of his father Abraham, when Melchiſedec met him.*