# Of the Vnion of the two natures in Chriſt.

NOw followeth the Vnion of the two natures in Chriſt, which eſpecially concerneth his Mediation, for by this vnion it commeth to paſſe, that his humanity did ſuffer death vpon the croſſe in ſuch ſort, as he could neither be ouercome, nor perpetually ouerwhelmed by it. Three things belong to this vniting of Natures.

I. Conception, by which his humane nature was by the wonderfull power and operation of God, both immediatly, that is, without mans helpe, and miraculouſly framed of the ſubſtance of the Virgin Mary. Luk. 1. 35. *The holy Ghoſt ſhall come vpon thee, and the power of the moſt high ſhall ouerſhadow thee.*

The holy Ghoſt cannot be ſaid to be the Father of Chriſt, becauſe he did miniſter no matter to the making of the humanitie, but did onely faſhion and frame it of the ſubſtance of the Virgin *Marie.*

II. Sanctification, whereby the ſame humane nature was purified, that is, altogether ſeuered by the power of the holy Ghoſt, from the leaſt ſtaine of ſinne, to the end that it might be holy, and be made fit to die for others. Luk. 1. 35. *That holy thing which ſhall be borne of thee ſhall be called the Sonne of God.* 1. Pet. 3. 18. *Chriſt hath once ſuffered for ſinnes, the iuſt for the vniuſt.* 1. Pet. 2. 22. *Who did not ſinne, neither was there guile found in his mouth.*

III. Aſſumption, whereby the Word, that is, the ſecond perſon in Trinitie, tooke vpon him fleſh, and the ſeede of Abraham, namely, that his humane Nature: to the end, that it being deſtitute of a proper and perſonall ſubſiſtence, might in the perſon of the Word obtaine it; ſubſiſting, and as it were, being ſupported of the word for euer. Ioh. 1. 14. *That Word was made fleſh.* Heb. 2. 16. *He tooke not vpon him the nature of Angels, but the ſeede of Abraham.*

In the aſſumption, we haue three things to conſider: I. The difference of the two natures in Chriſt. For the diuine nature, as it is limited to the perſon of the Sonne, is perfect and actually ſubſiſting in it ſelfe: the humane nature, which conſiſteth in whole of bodie and ſoule, doth neither ſubſiſt in it ſelfe, nor by it ſelfe: II. The manner of Vnion. The perſon of the Sonne did by aſſuming the humane nature, create it, and by creating, aſſume it, communicating his ſubſiſtence vnto it: the like example of vnion is no where to be found. III. The product of the Vnion. Whole Chriſt, God and man, was not made a new perſon of the two natures, as of parts compounding a new thing; but remained ſtill the ſame perſon. Now whereas the auncient Fathers tearmed Chriſt a *compound perſon,* wee muſt vnderſtand them not properly, but by proportion. For as the parts are vnited in the whole, ſo theſe two natures doe concurre together in one perſon, which is the Sonne of God.

By this we may ſee that Chriſt is one onely Sonne of God, not two: yet in two reſpects hee is the Sonne of God. As he is the eternall Word, he is by nature the Sonne of the Father: As he is man, the ſame ſonne alſo, yet not by nature, or by adoption, but onely by perſonall vnion, Luk. 1. 35. Math. 3. 17. *This is my beloued Sonne, &c.*

The phraſe in Scripture agreeing to this Vnion, is the *communion of properties,* which is a true and reall predication: euen as it ariſeth of the true and reall vnion of natures; concerning which, obſerue two rules.

I. Of thoſe things, which are ſpoken or attributed to Chriſt, ſome are onely vnderſtood of his diuine nature. As that, Ioh. 8. 58. *Before Abraham was, I am.* And that, Coloſſ. 1. 15. *Who is the image of the image of the inuiſible God, the firſt borne of euery creature.* Some againe agree onely to his humanitie, as *borne, ſuffered, dead, buried, &c.* Luk. 2. 52. *And Ieſus increaſed in wiſedome, and ſtature, and in fauour with God and man.* Laſtly, other things are vnderſtood, onely of both natures vnited together. As Matth. 17. 5. *This is my beloued Sonne, in whom onely I am well pleaſed, heare him.* Eph. 1. 22. *He hath made ſubiect all things vnder his feete, and hath appointed him ouer all things to be the head to the Church.*

II. Some things are ſpoken of Chriſt, as he is God, which muſt be interpreted according to his humane nature. Act. 20. 28. *To feede the Church of God,* that is, Chriſt, *which he* (according to his manhood) *hath purchaſed with his owne blood.* 1. Cor. 2. 8. *If they had knowne this, they would neuer haue crucified the Lord of glorie.* Contrarily, ſome things are mentioned of Chriſt, as he is man, which onely are vnderſtood of his diuine nature. Ioh. 3. 13. *No man aſcended vp to heauen, but he that hath deſcended from heauen, the Sonne of man which is in heauen.* This is ſpoken of his manhood, whereas we muſt vnderſtand, that onely his Deitie came downe from heauen. Ioh. 6. 62. *What if ye ſhould ſee the Sonne of man,* (viz. Chriſts humane nature) *aſcend vp, where he* (viz. his Deitie) *was before.*

Laſtly, by reaſon of this Vnion, Chriſt, as he is man, is exalted aboue euery name; yea, he is adored, and hath ſuch a great (though not infinite) meaſure of gifts, as farre ſurpaſſe the gifts of all Saints and Angels. Eph. 1. 21. *And ſet him at his right hand in heauenly places, farre aboue all principalitie, and power, and might, and domination, and euery name that is named, not in this world onely, but in that alſo that is to come.* Heb. 1. 9. [^1] *When he bringeth his firſt begotten Sonne into the world, he ſaith, And let all the Angels of God worſhip him.* Col. 2. 3. *In whom all the treaſures of wiſedome and knowledge are hidden.* Phil. 2. 9, 10. *Therefore God exalted him on high, and gaue him a name aboue all names, that at the name of Ieſus euery knee ſhould bowe* (namely, worſhip, and be ſubiect to him) *both of things in heauen, and things in earth, and things vnder the earth.*

[^1]: Transcriber's note: Likely intended Heb. 1. 6.