# Of Chriſts Natiuitie and Office.

THus much concerning Chriſts incarnation, the cleere declaration there was by his natiuitie.

The natiuitie of Chriſt, is that whereby *Marie* a Virgin, did after the courſe of nature, and the cuſtome of woman, bring from Chriſt the Word of the Father, and the Sonne of *Dauid*: ſo that thoſe are much deceiued, which are of opinion that Chriſt, after a miraculous manner, came into the world, the wombe of the Virgin being ſhut, Luk. 2. 23. *Euery man childe which firſt openeth the wombe ſhall be called holy to the Lord.* The which place of Scripture is applyed to *Mary* and our Sauiour Chriſt. Hence is it, that the Virgin *Mary* is ſaid (θεοτοκός) [^1] to bring forth God, albeit ſhe is not any way mother of the Godhead. For Chriſt as he is God, is without mother, and as man, without Father.

It is conuenient to be thought, that *Mary* continued a virgin vntill her dying day, albeit we make not this opinion any article of our beliefe. I. Chriſt being now to depart the world, committed his mother to the tuition and cuſtodie of his Diſciple *Iohn*, which it is like hee would not haue done, if ſhee had any children, by whom as cuſtome was, ſhee might haue beene prouided for. *Iohn* 19. 26. II. It is likely that ſhee who was with childe by the holy Ghoſt, would not after know any man. III. It is agreed of by the Church in all ages.

Chriſt being now borne, was circumciſed the eight day, that he might fulfill all the righteouſneſſe of the law: and being thirtie yeares of age, he was baptized, that he being publikely and ſolemnely inueſted into the office of his Mediatorſhip, might take vpon him the guilt of our ſinnes. He was both circumciſed and baptized, that we might learne: I. That the whole efficacie of the Sacraments, depend alone and wholly vpon him. II. That he was Mediatour of mankinde, both before and vnder the law, as alſo vnder grace. III. That he is the knot and bond of both couenants.

His office followeth, to the perfect accompliſhing whereof, he was annointed of his Father, that is, he was ſufficiently furniſhed with both gifts and authoritie. Heb. 1. 9. *Therefore God, euen thy God hath annointed thee with the oyle of gladneſſe aboue thy fellowes.* Eſay 61. 1. *The ſpirit of the Lord was vpon me, therfore he annointed mee. Ioh.* 3. 34. *God giueth him not the ſpirit of meaſure.*

If any man inforce this as a reaſon, that Chriſt could not performe the office of a Mediatour, beeing not the meane or middle betwixt God and man, but the partie offended, and ſo one of the extreames: we muſt know that Chriſt is two waies ſaid to be the middle or meane. I. Betwixt God and all men: for being both God and man, he doth participate with both extreames. II. Betwixt God and the faithfull onely: Firſt, according to his humanitie, whereby he receuied the ſpirit without meaſure. Secondly, according to his diuine nature, namely, as hee is the Word. Now the Word is *middle*, betwixt the Father, and the faithful: I. In regard of order, becauſe the Word was begotten of the Father, and by it we haue acceſſe vnto the Father. This ſubordination, which is of the Son to the Father, is not in the diuine eſſence, ſeuerally and diſtinctly conſidered, but in the relation or manner of hauing the eſſence. And thoſe things which are ſubordinate after this manner, cannot be vnequall, if they haue one and the ſame ſingular eſſence. II. In regard of his office, the which being impoſed on him, by his Father, he did willingly vndergoe, and of his owne accord.

Chriſt doth exerciſe this office according to both natures vnited in one perſon, and according to each nature diſtinct one from the other. For in reconciling God and man together, the fleſh performeth ſome things diſtinctly, & the Word other things diſtinctly: Again, ſome other things are done not by the Word or fleſh alone, but by both together.

This office is ſo appropriate to Chriſt, that neither in whole or in part, can it be tranſlated to any other. Heb. 7. 24. *This man becauſe he endureth for euer, hath an euerlaſting Prieſthood, or a Prieſthood that cannot paſſe from one man to another.*

Therefore Chriſt, as he is God, hath vnder him Emperours, Kings, Princes, to bee his Vicegerents; who therefore are called Gods. Pſal. 82. 1. But as he is Mediatour, that is, a Prieſt, a Prophet, and King of the Church of God, he hath no Vicegerent, Vicar, or Lieuetenant, who in his Kingly, Prieſtly or Propheticall office, in two of theſe, or in one, can be in his ſtead.

Chriſts office is threefold, Prieſtly, Propheticall, Regall, Pſal. 110. 1, 2, 3, 4. Eſay 42. 1.

Chriſts Prieſthood, is an office of his, wherin he performed all thoſe things to God, whereby is obtained eternall life. Heb. 5. 9, 10. *And being conſecrate, was made the author of eternall ſaluation, vnto all them that obey him: and is called of God an high Prieſt for euer after the order of Melchiſedec.* Chap. 7. 24, 25. *This man becauſe he endureth for euer, hath an euerlaſting Prieſthood; wherefore he is able alſo perfectly to ſaue all them that come vnto God by him.*

His Prieſt-hood conſiſteth of two parts, Satisfaction; and Interceſsion.

Satisfaction is that, whereby Chriſt is a full propitiation to his Father for the Elect. Iob. 33. 23. *If there be a meſſenger with him, or an interpreter, one of a thouſand, to declare vnto man his righteouſneſſe, then will he haue mercie vpon him, and will ſay, Deliuer him that he goe not downe into the pit, for I haue found a reconciliation.* Rom. 3. 24. *And are iuſtified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Chriſt Ieſus.* verſ. 25. *Whom God hath ſet forth to bee a reconciliation through faith in his blood.* 1. Ioh. 2. 2. *He is a propitiation for our ſinnes.*

Chriſts ſatisfied Gods anger for mans offence; according to his humanity, by performing perfect obedience to the will of God; according to his Deitie, by miniſtring to the ſame perfect obedience, eſpeciall dignity, to wit, merit before God, & efficacy. Ioh. 17. 19. *For their ſakes ſanctifie I am ſelfe, that they alſo may be ſanctified through the truth.* Act. 20. 28. *To feede the flocke of God, which hee hath purchaſed with his owne blood.* 2. Cor. 5. 19. *God was in Chriſt, and reconciled the world to himſelfe, not imputing their ſinnes vnto them.*

Satisfaction comprehendeth his paſsion, and fulfilling the Law.

His paſsion, is the firſt part of Satisfaction, by which, he hauing vndergone the puniſhment of ſinne, ſatisfied Gods iuſtice, and appeaſed his anger for the ſinnes of the faithfull. His paſsion was on this manner.

(*a*) Somewhat before his death, partly feare ariſing from the ſenſe of Gods wrath imminent vpon him, partly griefe poſſeſsing, as it were, each part of him, ſo diſturbed his ſacred mind, (*b*) that inwardly for a while it ſtroke into him a ſtrange kind of aſtoniſhment, or rather obliuion of his duty impoſed vpó him: & outwardly (*c*) made him pray vnto his Father (if he would) to remooue that cup from him, the which he did expreſſe with no ſmall cry, many teares, & a bloody ſweat, (d) trickling from his bodie vnto the ground. But when he came againe vnto himſelfe, (*e*) hee freely yeelded himſelfe vnto his Father to ſatisfie vpon the croſſe for the tranſgreſsion of man. After this his agonie was ouerpaſſed, (*f*) by *Iudas* his treachery Chriſt is apprehended, and (*g*) firſt he is brought to *Annas*, after to *Caiphas*, where *Peter* denieth him: (*h*) from *Caiaphas* hee is lead bound to *Pilate*, (*i*) *Pilate* poſteth him ouer to *Herod*, (*k*) hee tranſpoſteth him backe againe to *Pilate*, (*l*) who acknowledgeth his innocencie, and yet condemneth him as an offendour. This innocent thus condemned, is (*m*) pitifully ſcourged, crowned with thornes, ſcoffed, ſpitted at, ſpitefully adiudged to the death of the croſſe, (*n*) on which his hands and feet are faſtened with nailes. Here ſtaied not his paſsions, but after all theſe (*o*) he became as accurſed to God the Father, that is, God powred vpon him, being thus innocent, ſuch a ſea of his wrath, as was equiualent to the ſinnes of the whole world. He now being vnder this curſe, through the ſenſe and feeling of this ſtrange terrour, (*p*) complaineth to his Father that he is forſaken: who notwithſtanding, encountring then with Satan and his angels, did vtterly vanquiſh (*q*) and ouercome them. When this was ended, his heart (*r*) was pierced with a ſpeare, till the blood guſhed out from his ſides, and he gaue vp (*s*) the ghoſt: and (*t*) commended his ſpirit to his Fathers protection, the which immediatly went into Paradiſe. His body, (*u*) whereof not one bone was broken, was buried, and three daies was (*x*) ignominiouſly captiuated of death. (*a*) Mark. 4. 32. Math. 26. 38. (*b*) Ioh. 12. 27. Mark. 14. 35. (*c*) Math. 26. 37. 42. Ioh. 12. 29. Heb. 5. 7. (*d*) Luk. 22. 44. (*e*) Heb. 9. 5. 1. Cor. 5. 7. Eſa. 53. 10, 11. (*f*) Math. 26. 47. (*g*) Ioh. 18. 13, 14. (*h*) Ioh. 18. 29. (*i*) Luk. 23. 7, 8. (*k*) Luk. 23. 15. (*l*) Math. 27. 23. 26. (*m*) the ſame place. (*n*) Ioh. 19. 18. (*o*). Gal. 3. 13. (*p*) Math. 27. 35. 46. (*q*) Col. 1. 14, 15. (*r*) Ioh. 19. 34. (*s*) Heb. 9. 15, 16. (*t*) Luk. 23. 43. 46. (*u*) Ioh. 19. 33. 42. (*x*) Act. 1. 13.

In this deſcription of Chriſts paſsion, we may not fiue circumſtances eſpecially.

I. His Agony, namely, a vehement anguiſh, ariſing vpon the conflict of two contrary deſires in him: the firſt, was to be obedient to his Father. The ſecond, to auoid the horror of death. Luk. 22. 44. *Being in an agonie, he prayed more earneſtly, and his ſweat was like drops of blood, trickling downe to the ground.* Heb. 5. 7. *In the daies of his fleſh did offer vp prayers and ſupplications, with ſtrong crying and teares vnto him, that was able to ſaue him from death, and was alſo heard in that which he feared.*

II. His Sacrifice, which is an action of Chriſts offering himſelfe to God the Father, as a ranſome for the ſinnes of the elect. Heb. 9. 26. *Now in the end of the world hath he appeared once to put away ſinne, by the ſacrifice of himſelfe.*

In this ſacrifice the oblation was Chriſt, as he was man. Heb. 10. 10. *By the which will we are ſanctified, euen by the offering of Ieſus Chriſt once made.*

The Altar alſo was Chriſt, as he was God. Heb. 13. 10. *Wee haue an Altar, whereof they haue no authoritie to eate which ſerue in the Tabernacle.* Heb. 9. 14. *How much more ſhall the blood of Chriſt, which through the eternall ſpirit offered himſelfe without ſpot to God, purge your conſcience from dead workes to ſerue the liuing God?* Hence it is, that Chriſt is ſaid to ſanctifie himſelfe, as he is man, Ioh. 17. 19. *For their ſakes, ſanctifie I my ſelfe.* As the Altar, the gift; and the temple, the gold, Matth. 23. 17. 19.

Chriſt is the Prieſt, as he is God and man. Heb. 5. 6. *Thou art a Prieſt for euer after the order of Melciſedec.* 1. Tim. 2. 5, 6. *One Mediatour betweene God and man, the man Chriſt Ieſus, who gaue himſelfe a ranſome for all men, to be a teſtimony in due time.*

III. God the fathers acceptation of that his ſacrifice, in which he was well pleaſed. For, had it beene that God had not allowed of it, Chriſts ſuffering had beene in vaine, Math. 3. 17. *This is my beloued Sonne, in whom I am well pleaſed.* Eph. 5. 2. *Euen as Chriſt loued vs, and gaue himſelfe for vs, to be an offering and a ſacrifice of a ſweete ſmelling ſauour to God.*

IV. Imptutation of mans ſinne to Chriſt, whereby his Father accounted him as a tranſgreſſour, hauing tranſlated the burdé of mans ſinnes to his ſhoulders. Eſay 53. 4. *He hath borne our infirmities, & carried our ſorrowed: yet we did iudge him as plagued and ſmitten of God, and humbled: but he was wounded for our tranſgreſſions, he was broken for our iniquities, & c.* and verſ 12. *He was counted with the tranſgreſſours, and he bare the ſinnes of many.* 2. Cor. 5. 21. *He hath made him to be ſinne for vs, which knew no ſinne, that we ſhould be made the righteouſneſſe of God in him.*

V. His wonderfull humiliation conſiſting of two parts. I. In that he made himſelfe of ſmall or no reputatió in reſpect of his Deity, Phil. 2. 7, 8. *He made himſelfe of no reputation, &c. hee humbled himſelfe, and became obedient vnto the death, euen the death of the croſſe.*

We may not thinke, that this debaſing of Chriſt came, becauſe his diuine nature was either waſted or weakened, but becauſe his Deitie did, as it were, lay aſide, and conceale his power and maieſtie for a ſeaſon. And as *Irenaus* ſaith, *The Word reſted, that the humane nature might be crucified and dead.*

II. In that he became execrable, which is, by the Law accurſed for vs. Gal. 3. 10. *Curſed is euery one that remaineth not in all things written in the booke of the Law to doe them.*

This accurſedneſſe, is either inward or outward.

Inward, is the ſenſe of Gods fearefull anger vpon the croſſe. Reuel. 19. 15. *He it is that treadeth the winepreſſe of the fiercenes & wrath of Almighty God.* Eſay 53. 5. *He is grieued for our tranſgreſſions, the chaſtiſement of our peace was vpon him, and with his ſtripes we were healed.* This appeared by thoſe drops of blood, which iſſued from him, by his cryings to his Father vpon the croſſe, and by ſending of an Angel to comfort him. Hence was it, that he ſo much feared death, which many Martyrs entertained moſt willingly.

His outward accurſednes, ſtandeth in three degrees. I. Death vpon the croſſe, which was not imaginary, but true, becauſe blood and water iſſued from his heart. For ſeeing that water and blood guſhed forth together, it is very like, the casket or coat which inueſteth the heart called *Pericardion*, was pierced. As *Columbus* obſerueth in his Anatomy, 7. booke. *Ioh.* 19. 34.

His death was neceſſary, that hee might confirme to vs the Teſtament, or Couenant of grace promiſed for our ſakes, Heb. 9. 15, 16. *For this cauſe he is the Mediatour of the new Teſtament, that through death, &c. they which were called, might receiue the promiſe of eternall inheritance: for where a Teſtament is, there muſt be the death of him that made the Teſtament, &c.* verſ. 17.

II. Buriall, to ratifie the certentie of his death.

III. Deſcending into hell, which we muſt not vnderſtand, that he went locally into the place of the damned, but that for the time of his abode in the graue, he was vnder the ignominious dominion of death. Act. 2. 24. *Whom God hath raiſed vp, and looſed the ſorrowes of death becauſe it was impoſſible, that he ſhould bee holden of it.* Eph. 4. 9. *In that he aſcended, what was it but that he alſo deſcended firſt into the loweſt part of the earth?*

It was neceſſarie that Chriſt ſhould bee captiuated of death, that he might aboliſh the ſting, that is the power thereof. 1. Cor. 15. 55. *O death where is thy ſting! O hell where is thy victorie!*

Thus we haue heard of Chriſts marueilous paſsion, whereby he hath aboliſhed both the firſt and ſecond death, due vnto vs for our ſinnes; the which (as we may further obſerue) is a perfect ranſome for the ſinnes of all and euery one of the elect. 1. Tim. 2. 6. *Who gaue himſelfe a ranſome for all men.* For it was more, that Chriſt the only begotten Sonne of God, yea, God himſelfe, for a ſmall while ſhould beare the curſe of the law, then if the whole world ſhould haue ſuffered eternall puniſhment.

This alſo is worthy our Meditation, that then a man is well grounded in the doctrine of Chriſts paſsion, when his heart ceaſeth to ſinne, and is pricked with the griefe of thoſe ſinnes, whereby, as with ſpeares hee pierced the ſide of the immaculate lambe of God, 1. Ioh. 3. 6. *Who ſo ſinneth, neither hath ſeene him, nor known him.* Zach. 12. 10. *And they ſhall looke vpon him, whom they haue pierced, and they ſhall lament for him, as one lamenteth for his onely ſonne, and be ſorie for him, as one is ſorie for his firſt borne.*

After Chriſts paſsion, followeth the fulfilling of the Law, by which he ſatisfied Gods iuſtice in fulfilling the whole Law, Rom. 8. 3, 4. *God ſent his owne Sonne, that the righteouſneſſe of the Law might be fulfilled by vs.*

He fulfilled the Law, partly by the holines of his humane nature, and partly by obedience in the workes of the Law. Rom. 8. 2. *The Law of the ſpirit of life, which is in Chriſt Ieſus hath freed me from the Law of ſinne, and of death.* Math. 3. 15. *It becommeth vs to fulfill all righteouſneſſe, &c.* Ioh. 17. 19.

Now ſucceedeth the ſecond part of Chriſts Prieſthood, namely, interceſsion, whereby Chriſt is an Aduocate and intreater of God the Father for the faithfull. Rom. 8. 34. *Chriſt is at the right hand of God, and maketh requſt for vs.* Chriſts interceſsion, is directed immediately to God the Father. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. *If any man ſin, we haue an Aduocate with the Father, euen Ieſus Chriſt the iuſt.* Now as the Father is the firſt of the Trinitie in order, ſo if he be appeaſed, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt are appeaſed alſo. For there is one and the ſame agreement & will of all the perſons of the Trinitie.

Chriſt maketh interceſsion according to both natures. Firſt, according to his humanitie, partly by appearing before his Father in heauen, partly by deſiring the ſaluation of the Elect. Heb. 9. 24. *Chriſt is entred into very heauen to appeare now in the ſight of God for vs.* And chap. 7. 25. *He is able perfectly to ſaue them that come to God by him, ſeeing he euer liueth to make interceſſion for them.* Secondly, according to his Deitie, partly by applying the merit of his death; partly by making requeſt by his holy Spirit, in the hearts of the Elect, with ſighes vnſpeakable, 1. Pet. 1. 2. *Elect according to the foreknowledge of the Father to the ſanctification of the ſpirit.* Rom. 8. 26. *The ſpirit helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the ſpirit it ſelfe maketh requeſt for vs with ſighes which cannot be expreſſed.*

We are not therefore to imagine of ſurmiſe that Chriſt proſtrateth himſelfe vpon his knees before his Fathers throne for vs, neither is it neceſſary, ſeeing his very preſence before his Father, hath in it the force of an humble petition.

The end of Chriſts interceſsion is, that ſuch as are iuſtified by his merits, ſhould by this meanes continue in the ſtate of grace. Now Chriſts interceſsion preſerueth the elect in couering their continuall ſlips, infirmities, and imperfect actions, by an eſpeciall and continuall application of his merits; that by this meanes mans perſon may remaine iuſt, & mans workes acceptable to God. 1. Ioh. 2. 2. *He is a reconciliation for our ſins, & not for ours onely, but for the ſinnes of the whole world.* 1. Pet. 2. 5. *Yea as liuely ſtones, he made a ſpirituall houſe & holy prieſt-hood, to offer vp ſpirituall ſacrifices acceptable to God by Ieſus Chriſt.* Reu. 8. 3, 4. *And another Angell came and ſtood before the Altar, hauing a golden cenſer, and much odours was giuen vnto him, that he ſhould offer with the prayers of all Saints vpon the golden altar, which is before the throne, and the ſmoake of the odours with the prayers of the Saints, went vp before God out of the Angels hand.*

This farre concerning Chriſts Prieſthood; now follow his Propheticall, and Regall offices.

His Propheticall office, is that, whereby he immediately from his Father, reuealeth his word and all the meanes of ſaluation compriſed in the ſame. Ioh. 1. 18. *The Sonne, which is in the boſome of his Father, he hath declared vnto you.* Ioh. 8. 26. *Thoſe things which I heare of my Father, I ſpeake to the world.* Deut. 18. 18. *I will raiſe them vp a Prophet, &c.*

The word was firſt reuealed, partly by viſions, by dreames, by ſpeech; partly by the inſtinct and motion of the holy Ghoſt. Heb. 1. 1. *At ſundry times, and in diuers manners, God ſpake in old time to our fathers the Prophets: in theſe laſt daies he hath ſpoken to vs by his Son.* 2. Pet. 1. 21. *Prophecie came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of GOD ſpake as they were mooued by the holy Ghoſt.*

The like is done ordinarily onely by the preaching of the word, where the holy Ghoſt doth inwardly illuminate the vnderſtanding. Luk. 24. 45. *Then opened he their vnderſtanding that they might vnderſtand the Scriptures.* & 21. 15. *I will giue you a mouth and wiſedome, where againſt all your aduerſaries ſhall not be able to ſpeake, nor reſiſt.* Act. 16. 14. *Whoſe heart the Lord opened, that ſhee attended on the things that Paul ſpake.* For this cauſe, Chriſt is called the Doctor, Lawgiuer, and Counſellour of his Church. Matth. 23. 10. *Be not called Doctours, for one is your Doctour, Ieſus Chriſt.* Iam. 4. 12. *There is one Lawgiuer which is able to ſaue and to deſtroy.* Eſa. 9. 6. *He ſhall call his name Counſellour, &c.* Yea, he is the Apoſtle of our profeſſion. Heb. 3. 1. The Angell of the couenant. Mal. 3. 1. And the Mediatour of the new couenant. Heb. 9. 15. Therefore the Soueraigne authoritie of expounding the Scripture, onely belongs to Chriſt: and the Church hath onely the miniſtery of iudgement and interpretation committed vnto her.

Chriſts Regall office, is that; whereby he diſtributeth his gifts, and diſpoſeth all things for the benefit of the elect. Pſal. 2. & 110. 1, 2. *The Lord ſaid vnto my Lord, ſit thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy footſtoole.*

The execution of Chriſts Regall office, comprehendeth his exaltation.

Chriſts exaltation is that, by which he, after his loweſt humiliation; was by little and little exalted to glory; and that in ſundry reſpects, according to both his natures.

The exaltation of his diuine nature, is an apparant declaration of his diuine properties in his humane nature, without the leaſt alteration thereof. Rom. 1. 4. *Declared mightily to be the ſonne of God, touching the ſpirit of ſanctification by the reſurrection from the dead.* Act. 2. 36. *God hath made him both Lord and Chriſt, whom ye haue crucified.*

The exaltation of his humanity, is the putting off from him his ſeruile condition and all infirmities, and the putting on of ſuch habituall gifts; which, albeit they are created and finite, yet they haue ſo great and ſo marueilous perfection, as poſsibly can befall any creature. The gifts of his minde, are wiſedome, knowledge, ioy, and other vnſpeakable vertues: of his body, immortality, ſtrength, agilitie, brightneſſe. Phil. 3. 21. *Who ſhal change our vile body, that it may be faſhioned like vnto his glorious body.* Math. 17. 2. *He was transfigured before them, and his face did ſhine as the Sun, and his cloathes were as white as the light.* Heb. 1, 9. *God euen thy God hath annointed thee with the oyle of gladneſſe aboue thy fellowes.* Eph. 1. 20. 22.

Chriſts body, although, it be thus glorified, yet is it ſtill of a ſolide ſubſtance, compaſſed about, viſible, palpable, and ſhall perpetually remaine in ſome certaine place, Luk. 24. 39. *Behold my hands, and my feete, it is euen I, touch me, and ſee: a ſpirit hath no fleſh and bones, as ye ſee me haue.*

There be three degrees of Chriſts exaltation.

I. His reſurrection, wherein by his diuine power he ſubdued death, and raiſed vp himſelfe to eternall life, 2. Cor. 13. 4. *Though he was crucified concerning his infirmity, yet liueth he through the power of God.* Math. 28. 6. *He is not here, for he is risen, as he ſaid: Come, ſee the place where the Lord was laid.*

The end of Chriſts reſurrection, was to ſhew that his ſanctification, by his paſsion and death, was fully abſolute. For one only ſinne would haue detained the Mediatour, vnder the dominion of death, though he had fully ſatisfied for all the reſt. 1. Cor. 15. 17. *If Chriſt be not raiſed, your faith is in vaine: ye are yet in your ſinnes.* Rom. 4. 25. *Who was deliuered to death for our ſinnes, and is riſen againe for our iuſtification.*

II. His aſcenſion into heauen, which is a true, locall, and viſible tranſlation of Chriſts humane nature from each into the higheſt heauen of the bleſſed, by the vertue & power of his Deity. Act. 1. 9. *When he had ſpoken theſe things, while they beheld, he was taken vp: for a cloud tooke him out of their ſight: and and while they looked ſtedfaſtly towards heauen, as he went, behold two men ſtood by them in white apparell, which alſo ſaid, Ye men of Galile, why ſtand ye gazing into heauen. This Ieſus which is taken vp from you into heauen, ſhall come as ye haue ſeene him goe into heauen.* Eph. 4. 10. *He aſcended farre aboue all the heauens.*

The end of Chriſts aſcenſion was, that he might prepare a place for the faithfull, giue them the holy Ghoſt, and there enioy eternally glory. Ioh. 14. 2. *In my fathers houſe are many manſions: if it were not ſo, I would haue told you: I goe to prepare a place for you.* c. 16. 17. *If I goe not away, the Comforter will not come vnto you: but if I depart, I will ſend him vnto you.*

III. His ſitting at the right hand of God the Father, which metaphorically ſignifieth, that Chriſt hath in the higheſt heauens actually all glory, power, and dominion. Heb. 1. 3. *By himſelfe he hath purged our ſinnes, and ſitteth at the right hand of the Maieſty in the higheſt places.* Pſal. 110. 1. *The Lord ſaid to my Lord, ſit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foote-ſtoole.* 1. Cor. 15. 25. *Hee muſt raigne till he hath put all his enemies vnder his feet.* Act. 7. 55. *He beeing full of the holy Ghoſt, looked ſtedfaſtly into heauen, and ſaw the glory of God, and Ieſus ſtanding at the right hand of God,* Mat. 20. 21.

His regal office hath two parts: the firſt is; his regiment of the kingdome of heauen, part whereof is in heauen, part vpon earth, namely, the congregation of the faithfull.

In the gouernment of his Church, hee exerciſeth two prerogatiues royall. The firſt, is, to make lawes. Iam. 4. 12. *There is one Lawgiuer which is able to ſaue and to deſtroy.* The ſecond, is to ordaine his miniſters. Epheſ. 4. 11. *He gaue ſome to be Apoſtles, others Prophets, others Euangeliſts, ſome Paſtours and Teachers, &c.* 1. Cor. 12. 28. *God hath ordained ſome in the Church; as firſt, Apoſtles, ſecondly, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers; then them that doe miracles, after that, the gifts of healing, helpers, gouernors, diuerſity of tongues.*

Chriſts gouernment of the Church, is eyther by collection of it out of the world, or conſeruation beeing collected. *Epheſ.* 4. 12. *Pſal* 110.

The ſecond part of this Regall office, is the deſtruction of the kingdome of darknes. *Col.* 1. 13. *Who hath deliuered vs from the kingdome of darknes.* Pſal. 2. 9. *Thou ſhalt cruſh them with a scepter of yron, and breake them in pieces like a potters veſſell.* Luk. 19. 27. *Thoſe mine enemies, that would not that I ſhould raigne ouer them, bring hither, and ſlay them before me.*

The kingdome of darkeneſſe, is the whole company of Chriſts enemyes.

The prince of this kingdome, and of all the members thereof, is the diuell. Epheſ. 2. 2. *Ye walked once according to the courſe of the world, and after the prince that ruleth in the aire, euen the prince that now worketh in the children of diſobedience.* 2. Cor. 4. 4. *The God of this world hath blinded the eyes of the infidels.* 2. Corinth. 6. 15. *What concord hath Chriſt with Belial, or what part hath the beleeuer with the infidell?*

The members of this kingdome, and ſubiects to Satan, are his angels; and vnbeleeuers; among whom, the principall members are *Atheiſts,* who ſay in their heart, there is no God. *Pſalme* 14. 1. And *Magitians,* who bargaine with the diuell, to accompliſh their deſires. 1. *Samuel,* 28. 7. *Pſalm.* 58. 5. *Idolaters,* who either adore falſe gods, or the true God in an idol. 1. *Cor.* 10. 7. 20. *Turks* and *Iewes* are of this bunch; ſo are *Heretickes,* who are ſuch as erre with pertinacy in the foundation of religion. 2. *Tim.* 2. 18. *Apoſtates,* or reuolters from faith in Chriſt Ieſus. *Hebr.* 6. 6. *Falſe Chriſts,* who beare men in hand, they are true Chriſts. *Math.* 24. 26. There were many ſuch about the time of our Sauiour Chriſt his firſt comming, as *Ioſephus* witneſſeth, booke 20. if Iewiſh antiquities, the 11, 12. and 14. chapters. Laſtly, that *Antichriſt,* who as it is now apparent, can be none other but the Pope of Rome. 2. *Theſ.* 2. 3. *Let no man deceiue you by any meanes, for that day ſhall not come, except there come a departing firſt, and that man of ſinne be diſcloſed, euen the ſon of perdition, which is an aduerſary, and exalteth himſelfe againſt all that is called God, or that is worſhipped ſo that he doth ſit as God in the temple of God, ſhewing himſelfe that he is God.* Reu. 13. 11, 12. *And I beheld another beaſt comming out of the earth, which had two horns like the Lamb, but he ſpake like the dragon; and he did all that the firſt beaſt could doe before him, and he cauſed the earth, and them that dwell therin, to worſhip the beaſt, whoſe deadly wound was healed.*

There were then, firſt, Antichriſts at *Rome,* when the Biſhops thereof would bee entitled *vniuerſall,* or Biſhops ouer the whole Church through the world: but then were they complete, when they, together with Eccleſiaſticall cenſure, vſurped ciuill authority.

After that Chriſt hath ſubdued all his enemies, theſe two things ſhall enſue: I. The ſurrendring ouer of his kingdome to God the Father, as concerning the manner of regiment and ſpirituall policy, conſiſting in word and ſpirit together. II. The ſubiection of Chriſt, onely in regard of his humanity; the which then is, when the Sonne of God ſhall moſt fully manifeſt his maieſty, which before was obſcured by the fleſh as a vaile, ſo that the ſame fleſh remaining both glorious, and vnited to the Sonne of God, may by infinite degrees appeare inferiour.

Wee may not therefore imagine, that the ſubiection of Chriſt, conſiſteth in diminiſhing the glory of the humanity, but in manifeſting moſt fully the maieſty of the Word.

[^1]: Transcriber's note: Probably intended θεοτόκος