# The Printer to the Reader.

I SVPPOSE it altogether needleſſe (Chriſtian Reader) by commending Mr. WILLIAM PERKINS, the Author of this Booke, to wooe your holy affection, which either himſelfe in his life time by his Chriſtian conuerſation hath woone in you, or ſithence his death, the neuer-dying memorie of his excellent knowledge, his great humilitie, his ſound religion, his feruent zeale, his painefull labours, in the Church of God, doe moſt iuſtly challenge at your hands. Onely in one word I dare be bold to ſay of him, as in times paſt *Nazianzen* ſpake of *Athanaſius. His life was a good definition of a true Miniſter and preacher of the Goſpel.* And needleſſe alſo is it (if not iniurious) by praiſing of his learned and godly writings, to thinke to incline your better iudgement which in ſo holy a ſubiect (as is the body of Diuinitie, and principles of Religion) I dare not ſuſpect to be unſetled; and in ſo eaſie a methode and familiar a ſtyle, which he uſeth in them both, I am ſure can hardly miſcarrie. Such is his loue to all, that, as for the matter of his doctrine, hee contenteth and ſatisfieth the moſt learned; ſo for the manner of his deliuering the ſame, he condeſcendeth to the capacitie of the meaneſt of Gods children. I here once more preſent unto you the workes of this worthy man. Reade them diligently, and iudge of them freely. I doubt not but in your exacteſt cenſure, you will conſpire with thoſe learned Men, who for the profitable inſtruction they containe in all, or the moſt points of Chriſtianitie, for the more common good of the Church of God, haue deemed them worthy their godly labours, by tranſlating them into diuers languages, as into Latine, Dutch, Spaniſh, &c. A thing not ordinarily obſerued in other writings of theſe our times.

Concerning this new Edition, if you aske, why I haue not added theſe other Treatiſes of his, which haue beene publiſhed ſince the former Impreſſion? I anſwer, it is not done without the aduice of graue and learned men in two reſpects: Firſt, to ſet a difference (as indeede there is great oddes) betwixt thoſe bookes which the Author himſelfe yet liuing, by his owne care not onely in the penning, but likewiſe in the correcting of the ſame, did ſet forth: and thoſe other which are *Poſthumi,* that is, borne after his death, gathered and collected by others: Such as are theſe following:

1. Vpon three chapters of the Reuelation.
2. Sathans Sophiſtrie.
3. Vpon the Epiſtle of Saint Iude.
4. The dignitie of the Miniſterie.
5. Vpon the eleuenth chapter to the Hebrewes.
6. Vpon three chapters of Saint Matthewes Goſpel, &c.

Secondly, becauſe I haue remaining by me, ſo many other Treatiſes in diuers prints and formes of the ſame Authors owne collection, which I purpoſe (by Gods permiſſion) to ſet forth, as will amount to a ſecond Volume equall to this, if not bigger.

In the meane time, what heretofore I haue wiſhed concerning ſuch as haue the intereſt in thoſe Afterbirths, *viz.* that they would agree likewiſe, to draw them all into one Volume, that ſo they that take delight in *Mr. Perkins* his writings, might with leſſe labour of their owne, attaine to the compleate body of his ſtudies: it being alſo more conuenient for their uſe, to haue them rather compacted in one Volume, then ſcattered into diuers parcels of diuers formes: I now underſtand, is effected, and nothing henceforth to be added. Thus with promiſe to make all poſſible expedition in ſetting forth the ſecond Volume of his workes: I commend this to your diligent reading, my endeauours to your charitable conſtruction, and us all to the bleſſing and holy protection of Almightie God. *From London this 15. of December. 1612.*